-   decisions and outcomes. We tend to evaluate our decisions based on the outcomes of those decisions. If a decision turned out to have a negative outcome we think our decision was wrong. In fact, we must rephrase it as - we made the east decision based on the information we had and that led to a negative outcome.
-   Hindsight bias. We all have Hindsight bias where we look at the past and think that whatever happened was obvious and whoever predicted otherwise were just wrong.
-   If we want to improve in any aspect of life, we should learn from the results of our decisions. The quality of life is the sum of decision quality plus luck.
-   Embracing uncertainty makes us better decision makers.
-   "I'm not sure" is a more accurate representation of the world. When we accept that we can't be sure, we're less likely to fall into the trap of black-and-white thinking.
-   Decisions are bets on the future. They're not right or wrong based on how they turn out in that particular iteration.
-   We think we're open-minded and truth seeking but we hold beliefs, even wrong ones, and are too stubborn to change them.
-   Here's how we think we form beliefs: we hear something, we vet it and confirm it's true, we form a belief.
-   Here's how we actually form beliefs: we hear something, we believe it's true and then if we're inclined or have time to vet, we do that.
-   Confidence can be redefined by expressing confidence as a scale or a probability instead of an all-or-nothing framing. It's better to say you're 80% confident on a belief instead of claiming to be 100% confident. By saying you're only partly confident, it invites the listener to step in and correct you in case they know more than you. And it also helps yourself to be more truthseeking and accepting that you have incomplete knowledge on the subject.
-   black or white thinking: we tend to see things in binary. Either we're right or absolutely wrong; nothing in between. The world doesn't work that way.
-   Self-serving bias: we attribute our successes to skill and our failures to luck. Because we like to see ourselves as successful and have a positive narrative. Thinking this way makes us blind to the reality and increases Bias Blind Spot. We don't just do this to ourselves, but also when we look at other's successes and failures. We attribute another person's success to luck and their failures to our skill in identifying it.
-   Humans are competitive in nature. It's in our genes to be competitive. We look at people around us succeeding and start feeling like we're losing. As if it's a zero sum game.
-   a lot of the way we feel about ourselves comes from how we think we compare with others. This impedes learning. By shifting what it is that makes us feel good about ourselves, we can move toward a more rational fielding of outcomes and a more compassionate view of others. We can learn better and be more open minded if we work toward a positive narrative driven by engagement in truth-seeking and striving toward accuracy and objectivity: giving others credit when it's due, admitting when our decisions could have been better, and acknowledging that nothing in the world is black and white.
-   we tend to be laser focused on what's going on in the moment and tend to amplify the negative experiences that are happening in the moment. If we step back and look at that particular event, that caused a negative experience, in the long run, we don't feel so bad. An example is investing in stock market for the long haul. Some stocks have daily ups and downs but have a net increase in the long run. But when we watch the ticker every day, we get anxious about whether or not it was a good decision to invest in that stock. Having a long term perspective before making a decision helps with the decision. Because we will not be so emotionally connected to it.