<span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2022-12-18 Sun]</span></span> The way to understand Gnostics is that they are the axial revolution within the axial revolution. They're going to provide an understanding of western culture and its spiritual history and direction.

A worldview is where you have this deeply integrated and dynamic view of seeing yourself (as an agent) and seeing the world (as an arena) and the mutual conformity.

This may have happened in different instances or situations. For example, you're reading a book where the author is making an argument for something. You read it, you understand the arguments and you systematically agree with those arguments. Then there's this shift in your thinking. You stop seeing what the author is saying, and you start seeing what the author is seeing. You get into their perspective. In a way, you look at the world in their lens and what it's like to participate in that world view. That viability to enter into the agent-arena relation will help me to take the next step forward.

Consider the example of a mother-in-law not liking her daughter-in-law because of various reasons (like coarse/uncouthed) At some point, a change happens and she has an insight. This insight is not like the reframing like the 9-dot problem. Instead, this is bi-directional. She not only changes how she sees the world, but also how she sees herself. The agent-arena is co-changed in a participatory way. This is **Transframing** of the problem. What happens in this transformation is the MIL no longer sees her DIL as coarse, but as spontaneous. Not as uncouthed, but sincere. Not as lacking in elegance, but as possessing authenticity. This is when the MIL realizes that the way she has been framing things is wrong. She has a **systematic insight**; not an insight here or there, but a whole system of errors that she's transforming. This also called **Sensibility Transcendence**. What's happening here is, the DIL can be something she couldn't be before. And the MIL is becoming somebody that she couldn't become before. These 2 things are happening together.

This is what Christianity was offering - to go through a radical transformation (of sensibility transcendence) - opening up yourself, opening up the world, etc.

Now let's think of the opposite. Your inability to enter into or make viable to yourself a new way of being.

**Unthinkable**: The way to think of 'unthinkable' is, although you can make thoughts, images, propositions and inferences, you can't actually make it viable. You can't go through the sensibility transcendence that would bring you into living that worldview.

Example that John gives: his older son lives with him and he considers it such a blessing. He can have this thought to kick him out - by doing that the apartment would be clean, he'd have more money, etc. He can imagine what it would look like, he can run the thought and drive all the inferences. What he can't do is actually make all this viable for him. In that way, it's **unthinkable** to him. He can't bring himself to live in that world. It's not viable for him. It's unlivable for him.

Now let's think about the negative. You're stuck in a worldview you don't want to be in. You can't go through the sensibility transcendence to make that other worldview viable to you. You can't go through that change and you experience **Existential Inertia**. People often get into therapy for exactly this reason. They can state who they want to be, what kind of worldview they want to be in. They can imagine it, run inferences, they can even deeply want to be there. But they don't get there. They stay stuck. So they enter into therapy. And therapy has an agapic element to it.

**Transformative Experience** Example: somebody offers you a fruit that you've never tasted before. When you bite into the fruit, it can go one of 2 ways: you say this is something I've never tasted before and I love it. Or you say this is something I've never tasted before and I hate it. But there's no way for you to know which experience you'll have until you bite the fruit. This example points to the transformative experience where you have to *go through the experience* to know what it's like to have the experience. This is what is called an *epistemic transformation*.

Sometimes we're dealing with *personal transformation*. You don't know what it's like to be in that world view, because to know that you have to become a different person.

**Thought experiment**: Your friends come to you and convince you that they can turn you into a vampire. Would you do it? What happens here is, you don't know what it's like to be a vampire. You have no point of reference. You don't know what you're going to lose. Like, your values, your worldview, etc. So, you may think of not doing it. But then, you don't know what you're missing out on, so you would want to do it. There's no way to know what you gain or what you lose unless you go through with it.

Another example for this is: should you have a child? You don't know what you're going to gain/lose until you have a child because you'll become a different person. You're existentially ignorant.

A child doesn't know what they're going to lose (the childhood innocence) when they become an adult. They also don't know what they're going to miss if it doesn't become an adult.

People go into therapy not only because they're stuck and don't know how to transform, but also because they get stupefied. They don't know if they should. Often when people go to therapy for this, they say things like "I'm stubborn, I don't change my mind". When they're asked what they like about themselves, they say "I'm persistent, I don't give up, I don't change my mind". The very thing they want to change about themselves is the very thing they're unwilling to give up. This is called **Aspect Disguise**. They talk about the same thing - one under a negative aspect and one under a positive aspect and they don't realize it. They're existentially trapped.

What do people usually do when they want to have a child? Some people just have it, some people think deeply about it. Yet there are some people who get a pet (mostly a dog) and hope to prepare themselves as a "proxy child" by giving it a bed, toys, etc. Another example is dating advice - how to get to know someone you're dating better? Go on a trip with them. In essence, live with them for a week. That's *kinda* like living with them. Another example - role playing games, or even live action role playing. In LARP, the director (dungeon master) changes roles and scenes, and the players have to enact them. It's emotionally challenging to them and they have to adopt a persona in such a way that the line between LARP and real life blurs.

People engage in *play*. The whole point of a play is it puts you in between the world you're in and the world you want to be in. The intersection is where you'll *play*. We think of *play* as only about fun. What people are doing in these instances is **Enactive Analogy**. This is an analogy you enact. You go through the actions. The enactive analogy should be similar enough to that world you want to live in and also similar enough to this world that you pull out if you need to. You want to put yourself in a world where you can *play*. The dance between what it would be like and what you are now is what you're doing in therapy.

One of the important things of religion is *play*. That's what ritual is, when properly understood. People are *playing* in order to try and put themselves in a liminal place between the normal world and the sacred world they want to dwell within. They're *playing* in order to see how and whether they should go through the change in the world itself and the religion is demanding and affording.

Sensibility Transcendence is Anagoge. It's how you enter a worldview. What you need is not just enactive analogy. What you need is a way to enact anagoge. Rituals were also giving us skills on how to get unstuck, how to undergo sensibility transcendence, how to make that world viable.

In **Gnosis**, what we're trying to do is to bring about Altered State of Consciousness. Because that will put us into a flow state, has the possibility of giving us a higher state of consciousness, mystical experiences and this is being set in a ritual context, where we're doing enactive analogy and enactive anagoge. We're doing serious play.

Gnosis is a set of psychotechnologies that create a ritual context (like therapy or martial arts) that allows us to overcome the existentially stuck, existentially stupefied and that is being powered by an altered state of consciousness that's induced by chanting, sleep deprivation, psychedelics. And what gnosis does is it frees me from being existentially trapped.