<span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2023-01-07 Sat]</span></span> Many people are seeking Gnosis today since gnosis is the kind of thing you need in order to bring about a release from existential entrapment that we’re finding in the meaning crisis.

The gnostics have this idea. Plato has this idea where the everyday world consists of shadows and echoes. They’re not fully real, they’re in a profound sense "images", they participate in the "forms" - patterns of intelligibility and realness. Plato thought forms are basically eternal. The eternal forms would express themselves in temporal things.

Plato talks about Demiurge (the craftsman), which is a rational agent that becomes aware of the form and he shapes things in space and time in order to make the world of becoming have some reality to it. So it has some important similarities to the eternal world and that means by paying attention to temporal events, we can become aware of eternal principles (similar to what science does right now).

Plato is trying to understand mythologically the relationship - he’s trying to give us a way of imagery and story of understanding the relationship between eternity and time.

The gnostics were influened by this. They took this notion and did something very interesting to it. They said the temporal world (the world we’re in) has very significant suffering. They’re feeling deeply and existentially trapped. They were convinced that whoever created the world (with so much suffering) was either stupid or evil or both.

In Plato’s version, the demiurge is a beneficent being. But in the gnostics’ worldview, the demiurge becomes an evil overlord. What gnostics are trying to do is articulate that the sense of being trapped and the social, cultural, political and economic structures they’re living in are actually thwarting them. With this kind of worldview, you’d start to think that maybe that’s a mythological way of talking about something that you might be experiencing. You’re experiencing existential entrapment and when you look out at the patterns of the culture around you, you don’t feel like they’re shaping the world that’s going to help you alleviate your entrapment. Instead, you feel they’re stupid and evil.

For the gnostics, they tried linking the "evil overlord" paradigm to a mythology. So, they identified all the existing gods (whether it’s god of the Jews or gods of the Romans). Instead of seeing them as divine beings, they saw them as the guards of the prison.

Up until now, the relationship between people and gods were one of servitude - often bordering on notions of slavery. We were the slaves or the servants of the gods. The gnostics wanted to invert that. Instead of worshipping/idealizing these gods, or giving in to these powers and principalities, these patterns that are pervasive and profound in the way they entrap us, instead of thinking how we should serve and fit into them. (Remember the axial revolution - you don’t want to "fit in" to the world, you want to transcend it). Instead of fitting in, we have to transcend them all. They’re not divine, they’re our prison gods. They may be powerful, but we have to realize that there’s something in us (like a divine spark) that will actually carry us above - to the god beyond all gods.

To the gnostics, the god that they considered as the "evil overlord" is the god of the old testament - evil, jealous, vindictive, who threatens and bullies people, authorizes genocide, shows favoritism for no good reason. That god is compared to the god of the new testament - the god of agape, the god of light and love. And this god doesn’t want our worship. He wants us to reunite with Him. He wants us to fully participate.

We have the potential for gnostic love - we have the potential to remember that we belong with the god of the new testament. We can sense that we don’t belong here, but belong somewhere else. The idea is, the agapic god sends individuals down into the world of suffering to bring us gnosis, to bring us this kind of transformative knowledge that will set us free. So what the gnostic Christians said was Jesus was this individual.

The gnostics didn’t want to consider the purpose of Christianity as a set of doctrines or dogma. The purpose of it is to give us a mythology to free us from our existential suffering and allow us to experience the transcendence of the god. So, the gnostics keep churning new gospels, new stories and new myths. Because for them it’s not about having a final orthodox story or set of principles. It’s about having engaged in (or participated in) the process of creating the enactive analogies, the enacted anagoge. That’s what actually matters. The core of spirituality is not worship, it’s self-transcendence - healing and freeing people from existential entrapment.

This has Platonic elements all over it. There are people trapped in a cave (like trapped in a world of suffering) and they get the secret knowledge that frees them (somebody comes to bring about gnosis) and they can return to see the light. In Plato’s version, they go back to the cave and for gnostics, you spread the message to as many people as you can. Jesus is like a teacher like a shaman or a therapist who provides us with the keys to unlock all the ways in which these patterns (ways of thinking and being) exacerbate our suffering.

We long for that now. Several movies are basically modern portrayals of the gnostic mythology. Matrix has Christian, Platonic and the Gnostic mythology in them. The Truman Show is another example. Also, Star Wars.

The dark side of the gnostic mission - this is a conspiracy theory. That is, amidst all the chaos and suffering, there actually is an evil overlord. There’s a whole system that’s keeping you from discovering what’s true and what kind of a true man that you are.

We should have an ambivalent attitude towards it. We should be able to extricate gnosis from gnosticsm. Or how can we salvage agape from Christianity.

Christianity, Gnosticism and Neo-platonism are deeply intertwined.

By analogy, Plotinus is the grand unified field theory of ancient spirituality. He takes Plato’s spirituality and the whole idea of anagoge. He takes Aristotle’s theory (theory of knowing, the theory of structure of the world). He also takes from the Stoics the therapeutic project (overcoming modal confusion). He integrates them all together.

**Explanation of Plotinus’ work**: Aristotle’s conformity theory - we know something by conforming to it, by sharing the same structural functional organization. Like conforming to a cup which has a certain SFO. Aristotle has there are levels of being. At the lowest level there’s pure potentiality and at the highest level there’s pure actuality. So, there are levels of realness. As we know (participatory) and make the levels of reality *viable to us* and *livable to us*, we conform to them and we change. As we conform and make this level of reality real to us, we’re also conforming and moving to a higher level of the self. We’re also altering what level the self is at. What this does for us is help us deeply remember the being mode (who we really are).

**Example**: What is it that makes something real? How much time have you put into that? If you’re driven by the pursuit of realness and you don’t understand what it is, that’s the gap of ’bullshit’. So, what makes something real? It’s not just about what makes something real, how do we also sense that it’s real?

The answer: what makes something real is how *one* it is, how *integrated* it is, how much it is *structurally functionally organized*. We treat the object is more real than the shadows because it’s more structurally functionally organized.

Another example - what is it to understand something? There are a bunch of separate things and when I understand them, I find how they’re all one, how they can all be integrated together. When I understand something, I understand how all its parts are integrated together. Things become more real to us *as* we integrate them together and they’re more real as things *as* they are integrated together.

As we try and find the deeper underlying principles that integrate things together, *we* become more integrated together. We become more real. We’re "realized". We’re "actualized". This can be seen in Plato’s anagoge. The inner conflict in me is reduced, I become more real as I become more integrated. And that’s allowing me to make viable and real these integrated deeper levels of reality and the whole thing spins anagogically. What happens is I move from where things are only potential, they don’t have much form all the way up to having the greatest structural functional organization they can. All of this is not just a theory. It’s a change in the existential mode. That’s why the word is "realization". It’s simultaneously the making more real of the world and me and becoming more aware of what’s more real.

So, what’s at the core of this? It’s the principle that makes everything real. It can’t in any way be multiple. So Plotinus calls this The One. It doesn’t mean ’single’. This is that by which reality is realized and our mind realizes reality.

Plotinus uses the metaphor of the light. The light by itself is invisible, but it makes everything see-able. The One is not anything we can ever know. You can’t know The One, because it is that by which everything is knowing. It is that by which everything is. So, how do you ever reunite with it if it beyond all possible thought? You can’t know it, you can’t have it even in the most beautiful theory. You can only be it. At the height of the Plotinus’ system, is a higher state of consciousness, an awakening experience.