<span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2023-01-11 Wed]</span></span> Augustine had tremendous inner conflict. He subscribed to the ’Mani’ worldview that &#x2026; When he was a young adolescent he stole a fruit in a courtyard just because he wanted to do something wrong.

Augustine reads Plotinus and he ’understands’ it. He has mystical experience, but he can’t hold it. The darkness in him pulls him back to his addiction. Augustine reads the work of Paul in the Bible.

Augustine realizes that Plato and Plotinus were saying that the world is driven by two powerful love. Love of becoming one (within) and love of becoming one with what is most real. What’s driving all of our reason is Love. A love for what’s true, a love for what’s real and a love for what’s real. At the heart of reason is love and what’s damaged in me is my capacity to love, not reason.

How do we grow in love? By agape. By participating in agape, we grow in love - we grow in the love that’s driving us in becoming fully realized persons. Augustine says neoplatonism needs Christianity and the healing process given by Gnosticism can provide it to Christianity.

Aristotle proposed what’s called the **Nomological Order**, which tells you how things are structured. How they’re integrated in the structural functional organization.

Plotinus gave us what’s called the **Normative Order**. He said we could go up the levels of reality, up the levels of consciousness, up the levels of the self from what’s less real to what’s more real.

Augustine realizes that as one goes downward (in these levels), things become more fragmented, unintelligible, more chaos, losing what it makes sense to be sensible and intelligible and that’s evil. The other way is up which is more true, more good, more real. And this is driven by love (a love of knowing what’s real and simultaneously becoming what’s real). The normative order tells you how *you* can become better, how you can deal with evil and how you can increase realness and meaning in your life.

Augustine says that everything is moving with a purpose (basically what Aristotle is saying with SFO), but that purpose is to move towards The Good (good here refers to Plotinus’ view on the spectrum from chaos to oneness). And says that all of this is driven by love, the transformation that happens in me, the gnosis agape. That’s the **Narrative Order**. There’s a great story about the course of history which is about moving towards the Promised Land. That’s the history of God’s love of intervening and creating the open future. That agape isn’t just a historical force. It’s also a normative force within me. It’s leading me upwards towards The Good. He concludes that Christianity can put all of this together. The world is organized in a way (Aristotle’s Nomological Order), so that it moves through history (Plotinus’ Normative Order) so that all of us can self transcend (Augustine’s Narrative Order). All of the orders can come together.

**Sense of coherence**: the more things that are intelligible, the more things fit together for you, the more real they are, the more meaningful you find your life. That’s the nomological order. **Sense of significance**: how deep in reality are the elements of your life. That’s the normative order. **Sense of purpose**: what’s the direction of your life? Is it moving in a course? That’s narrative order.

*Meaning* is to have a nomological order that connects us to what’s real. It is to have a normative order that connects us existentially to what is good so that we can become better. Meaning is to have a narrative order that tells us how we can move forward through history, both collective and individual history. These are not 3 separate things. These are the 3 axes of the space of meaning.

1054 AD - the Great Schism. Roman empire collapses in the west, not the east. The east and the west become culturally different and even speak different languages. Christianity also separates with the east being more orthodox than the west. Here, the west loses some of the deep spiritual connection Christianity offered.

Before 1054, reading was done aloud. People used to get together and read the Bible out loud. This is similar to reciting poetry. There’s a huge difference between reading silently and reciting. With reciting, you get the intonations, pauses at the right moments, etc. You bascically feel different when you hear someone recite poetry. So, it was no longer something you read and understood. It became something that changed you.

**Lectio Divina** - is to engage with a text in a meditative mindful fashion opening yourself up to the possibility of it transforming you. It’s like going somewhere to listen to music and before doing so, preparing yourself to have a profound asthetic experience.

People start to read silently and what they end up giving importance to is coherence within the language rather than transformation within themselves and the world. So what mattered was how the various symbols and logical connections of the language fit together coherently.

So, a new model of though emerges. The old model was articulated to develop and expand into this whole process of gnosis, and Agape and self transformation. That model of knowing that’s also the way of becoming. That’s being taken away and is being replaced by a different model. Thoughts or *knowing* is to have a coherent propositional language. Thinking is to have a coherent set of propositions in your head.

We shift from the extensive self. The self that’s transjectively connected to the world that understands itself in terms of its conformity to the world, to an intensive self. This is a self that’s inside my head and inside my beliefs. My self is primarily the way I talk to myself by affirming my beliefs through propositional language. So people start to think that the primary way to know things is to get coherence within our inner language than instead of conformity in our outer existential modes.

Why would people make this shift? Because the world is starting to open up again. People want to know the world scientifically. People moved towards the value of logically coherent well-organized propositional theories. The power of this is being discovered. When I can read in this other way, I can empower my argumentative skills tremendously. What I’m losing is Reading as a psycho-technology, of psycho-spiritual existential transformation. Reading is now becoming the consumption of propositions and they’re structuring in logical coherences.

This is because Aristotle is coming into prominence because he’s being rediscovered. His nomological order and how to think logically was not enough to explain Christian worldview, especially with the new model of thinking that was emerging.

Thomas Aquinas tries to solve this, i.e. to salvage both the Christian worldview and the new science of the rediscovered Aristotle. He goes the fundamental grammar of this - the two worlds, the real world and the illusory world. He says real world can study reason and science, and they can discover real truths about that - through reason and science. But the other world (what we just called the illusory world) is more real. What we referred to as the real world was termed as The Natural World and the other world was Supernatural World. And the latter cannot be studied by reason. It is only accessible by faith. Now there’s no continuum between that.

For Plotinus and Augustine, love moves reason. For Aquinas love moves the will to assert things that it can’t know through reason. Faith now becomes the act of willful assertion. This *will* is a will that’s being driven by the love of God. Love and reason is being pulled apart. Faith is now going through this assertions of propositions giving a creed and more fundamentally, science and spirituality are being divorced from each other, such that if it’s scientific it’s not spiritual and vice versa. If it’s love, it has nothing to do with reason and vice versa.

He’s trying to save the axial worldview by reformulating its fundamental grammar of two worlds into a formulation that’s now becoming familiar to us. But here’s the danger. As the worldview of the natural world (by studying it with reason) and we less and less find the assertions (our will no longer being driven by love and just by willpower alone) the supernatural worldview becomes less and less real to us. If there’s no supernatural world and is no longer viable to us and it’s not longer livable to us, the whole axial world mythology, the axial world grammar that gave us the grammar of meaning and wisdom and self-transcendence is now threatened to fall apart.